docs: adding `reply` info in a AsyncAPI document (#2228)
asyncapi/website: pages/docs/concepts/asyncapi-document/reply-info.md

---

> title: Adding reply Info

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Adding reply info
```

weight: 210
---

> Request/Reply is a common messaging or communication pattern where one component or service, known as the requestor, sends a request to another component or service, known as the replier and waits for a response. This pattern is often used when a component needs to initiate an action and receive a specific response in return either synchronously or asynchronously. In even-driven architectures this communication pattern is asynchronous, meaning that the requester does not block and wait for an immediate response. Instead, it can continue processing other tasks or even send out other requests while waiting for the reply to arrive. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Request/Reply is a communication pattern where one entity, the 'requestor,' sends a message to another, the 'replier', and waits for a response. Such a pattern is used when a component (or service) needs to initiate an action and receive a specific response in return, either synchronously or asynchronously. In Event-Driven Architectures, this communication pattern is asynchronous, meaning that the requester does not block and wait for an immediate response. Instead, it can continue processing other tasks or even send out other requests while waiting for the reply to arrive. 
```

> In case of multiple requests made, each request is processed independently and sends the reply/response to the corresponding requestor when ready.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of multiple requests made, each request is processed independently and sends the reply/response to the corresponding requestor when ready.
```

Here is diagram to illustrate the working of a basic request/reply pattern:
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    Requester->>Channels: Send Request through Channel A
    Channels->>Responder: Deliver Request
    activate Responder
    Responder-->>Channels: Send Reply through Channel B
        deactivate Responder
    Channels-->>Requester: Deliver Reply
```

> The request/reply pattern in AsyncAPI works in the same fashion while supporting all the different sub-patterns. Irrespective of the sub-pattern you would like to represent, the Request/reply pattern can be implemented in the AsyncAPI document in the `Operation` object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The request/reply pattern in AsyncAPI works in the same fashion while supporting all the different sub-patterns. Irrespective of the sub-pattern you would like to represent, the request/reply pattern can be implemented in the AsyncAPI document in the `Operation` object.
```

You can add the reply info using the `Operation Reply` object under the `Operation` object. The `reply` field represents the response details.

In AsyncAPI, you have the flexibility to represent the request/reply pattern in two different ways.

> The first approach is when the requester specifies at runtime, within the request itself, where the response should be sent. This allows for dynamic determination of the reply address based on factors such as the request message payload or header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first approach is when the requester specifies at runtime, within the request itself, where the response should be sent. Such an approach allows for the dynamic determination of the reply address based on factors such as the request message payload or header.
```

The second approach is when the requester already knows exactly where the response should be sent. In such cases, the address of the reply channel is directly specified in the AsyncAPI document.

> ## Dynamic response Channel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Dynamic response channel
```

There are situations where you do not know the reply channel at the design time. Instead, the reply address is dynamically determined at runtime, based on factors such as the request message payload or header. 

In the case where you don't know the address of the reply yet, you have the option to either assign null to the `address` property or omit the property entirely indicating that the address is not known at the moment. The `address` property being referred to in this case is part of the channel that the operation with the reply references to. To dynamically specify where the reply should be sent, you can use the `Operation Reply Address` object. The `Operation Reply Address` object has a property called `location` that allows you to define a runtime expression that specifies the address of the reply channel. 

> For example, you can use such an expression to specify that the reply should be sent to the channel specified by the requestor in the request header under a specific property, like `replyTo`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, this pattern allows the replier to direct its response to a specific channel as defined by the requestor. This is typically achieved by including a `replyTo` property in the request header. The requestor specifies this property to indicate where it expects to receive the response, guiding the communication flow in a structured and predictable manner.
```

```yml
asyncapi: 3.0.0

info:
  title: Ping/pong example for a requester with a dynamic reply channel
  version: 1.0.0

>   description: Example with a requester that initiates the request/reply pattern where the reply will happen on whatever is defined in the header `replyTo` of the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: Example with a requester that initiates a request/reply interaction, with the response directed to the destination specified in the request's `replyTo` header.
```

channels:
  ping:
    address: /ping
    messages:
      ping:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/ping'
  pong:
    address: null
    messages:
      pong:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/pong'

operations:
  pingRequest:
    action: send
    channel: 
      $ref: '#/channels/ping'
    reply:
      address:

>         description: The reply address is dynamically determined based on the request header `replyTo`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        description: The response destination is dynamically set according to the `replyTo` field in the request header
```

        location: "$message.header#/replyTo"
      channel: 
        $ref: '#/channels/pong'
```

## Multiple channels with single message when reply address is known

> The request/reply pattern can also be implemented over multiple channels with single message. You can do this by specifying multiple channels with single message and specifying the same address for both the requester and the replier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The request/reply pattern can also be implemented over multiple channels with a single message. You can do this by specifying multiple channels with a single message and specifying the same address for both the requester and the replier.
```

> Here's a example of setting up both requestor and replier over the same address:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's an example of setting up both the requestor and replier over the same address:
```

```yml
asyncapi: 3.0.0

info:
  title: Ping/pong example with requester over the same channel
  version: 1.0.0

>   description: Requester example initiating the request-reply pattern that are using the same channel for the reply

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: Requester example initiating a request-reply interaction, utilizing the same channel for both sending the request and receiving the reply.
```

channels:
  ping:
    address: /
    messages:
      ping:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/ping'
  pong:
    address: /
    messages:
      pong:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/pong'

operations:
  pingRequest:
    action: send
    channel: 
      $ref: '#/channels/ping'
    reply:
      channel: 
        $ref: '#/channels/pong'
```

## Multiple messages over the same channel when reply address is known

> Sometimes, you would want to use another approach to represent the [same information above](#multiple-channels-with-single-message). You can do so by specifying multiple messages under the same channel. In such scenarios, you can use the `messages` property in the `Operation` object to explicitly define which message among the multiple messages available over the same channel is a request and which is a reply.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases, representing the [same information](#multiple-channels-with-single-message) might require a different approach. You can do so by specifying multiple messages under the same channel. In such scenarios, use the `messages` property in the `Operation` object to explicitly define which message among the multiple messages available over the same channel is a request and which is a reply.  
```

> Here's a example where we have multiple messages over the same channel with the same address and we define in the `Operation` object explicitly which message among the available messages is a request and which is a reply:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider an example where multiple messages are transmitted over a single channel, all sharing the same address. In this setup, the `Operation` object is utilized to distinctly specify which of these messages serves as the request and which functions as the reply:
```

```yml
asyncapi: 3.0.0

info:
  title: Ping/pong example when a channel contains multiple messages
  version: 1.0.0

>   description: Simple example with a requester that initiates the request-reply pattern, where the root channel contains multiple messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: Requester example that initiates the request-reply pattern within a root channel that contains multiple messages
```

---
title: Adding reply Info
weight: 210
---

> Request/Reply is a common messaging or communication pattern where one component or service, known as the requestor, sends a request to another component or service, known as the replier and waits for a response. This pattern is often used when a component needs to initiate an action and receive a specific response in return either synchronously or asynchronously. This communication pattern is typically asynchronous, meaning that the requester does not block and wait for an immediate response. Instead, it can continue processing other tasks or even send out other requests while waiting for the reply to arrive. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Request/Reply is a common messaging or communication pattern where one component or service, known as the requestor, sends a request to another component or service, known as the replier and waits for a response. This pattern is often used when a component needs to initiate an action and receive a specific response in return either synchronously or asynchronously. In even-driven architectures this communication pattern is asynchronous, meaning that the requester does not block and wait for an immediate response. Instead, it can continue processing other tasks or even send out other requests while waiting for the reply to arrive. 
```

In case of multiple requests made, each request is processed independently and sends the reply/response to the corresponding requestor when ready.

> The request/reply pattern in AsyncAPI works in the same fashion while supporting all the different sub-patterns. Irrespective of the sub-pattern you would like to implement, the Request/reply pattern can be implemented in the asyncAPI document using actions in the `Operation` object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The request/reply pattern in AsyncAPI works in the same fashion while supporting all the different sub-patterns. Irrespective of the sub-pattern you would like to implement, the Request/reply pattern can be implemented in the AsyncAPI document using actions in the `Operation` object.
```

> can be implemented in the AsyncAPI document using actions

what do you mean like? 

- it is not like "implemented" but rather "represented"
- and what actions have to do here, it is more a reply?

> You can add the reply info using the `Operation Reply` object under the `Operation` object. The `reply` object represents the response message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can add the reply info using the `Operation Reply` object under the `Operation` object. The `reply` represents the response details.
```

not only reply, I think better say details

Here is diagram to illustrate the working of a basic request/reply pattern:
```mermaid

> sequenceDiagram

Reviewer 2: it is good diagram but generic, not related to AsyncAPI itself so suggest to move it to line 9 before we say req/reply can be done with AsyncAPI

    participant Requester as Requester
    participant Responder as Responder
    Requester->>Responder: Send Request
    activate Responder
    Responder-->>Requester: Send Reply
    deactivate Responder
```

> ## Sub-patterns

Reviewer 2: did you get this from some external resources, this phrase like sub-pattern? As for me there are no such sub-patterns. It is just more about different way you can implement req/reply, when you know the message and its location by default, or it is dynamic

so I suggest not to use it and just have `dynamic response` section directly. And before you can have just a paragraph that in AsyncAPI you can represent req/reply it 2 different ways, when "requester specifies in in runtime in request where response should be sent" and "when requester know exactly where the response will be sent"

### Dynamic response Channel
There are situations where you do not know the reply channel at the design time. Instead, the reply channel is dynamically determined at runtime, based on factors such as the request message payload or header. 

> In this case, since you don't know what the address of the reply channel is yet, you can either assign null to the `address` property or omit the property entirely indicating that the address is not known yet. You can now use `Operation Reply Address` object to dynamically specify where the reply has to be sent. The `Operation Reply Address` object has a property called `location` which essentially takes in a runtime expression that specifies the address of the reply channel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, since you don't know what the address of the reply channel is yet, you can either assign null to the `address` property or omit the property entirely indicating that the address is not known yet. You can use `Operation Reply Address` object to dynamically specify where the reply has to be sent. The `Operation Reply Address` object has a property called `location` which essentially takes in a runtime expression that specifies the address of the reply channel. 
```

let's not write `now` as it indicates previously it was not available, but in docs we should already write about current state, assume someone new reads docs, and is not interested that before it was not possible, these are release notes for.

you can also add at the end something like
"With such an expression you can specify that, for example, reply is sent to the channel specified by the requestor in the request header under specific property, like for example `REPLY_TOPIC`" <- definitely can be written better 😄  it is just a suggestion

in general about this paragraph, problem is that first sentence talks about "address" and then there is operation reply mentioned, and it is not clear that the "address" that you can omit or set to null, is part of the channel, that the operation with reply references too

```yml
asyncapi: 3.0.0

info:
  title: Ping/pong example for dynamic reply channel sub-pattern
  version: 1.0.0
  description: Example with a requester that initiates the request/reply pattern where the reply will happen on whatever is defined in the header `replyTo` of the request.

channels:
  ping:
    address: /ping
    messages:
      ping:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/ping'
  pong:
    address: null
    messages:
      pong:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/pong'

operations:
  pingRequest:
    action: send
    channel: 
      $ref: '#/channels/ping'
    reply:
      address:
        description: The reply address is dynamically determined based on the request header `replyTo`
        location: "$message.header#/replyTo"
      channel: 
        $ref: '#/channels/pong'
  pongReply:
    action: receive
    channel: 
      $ref: '#/channels/ping'

>     reply:

Reviewer 2: I don't think it is good, this app has only ping operation. Pong is just a result of reply, there should not be a separate operation as this app is not receiving such info as pong by default

Author: So would you recommend I remove the pongReply operation?

      address:
        description: The reply address is dynamically determined based on the request header `replyTo`
        location: "$message.header#/replyTo"
      channel: 
        $ref: '#/channels/pong'
```

### Request/reply over the same channel
The request/reply pattern can also be implemented over the same channel. You can do this by specifying the same address for both the requester and the replier.

Here's a example of setting up both requestor and replier in the same channel:
```yml
asyncapi: 3.0.0

info:
  title: Ping/pong example with requester
  version: 1.0.0
  description: Requester example initiating the request-reply pattern.

channels:
  ping:
    address: /
    messages:
      ping:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/ping'
  pong:
    address: /
    messages:
      pong:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/pong'

operations:
  pingRequest:
    action: send
    channel: 
      $ref: '#/channels/ping'
    reply:
      channel: 
        $ref: '#/channels/pong'

>   pongReply:

Reviewer 2: same as with other example, this app do not receive pong by default, and this should be mentioned only under reply of pingRequest

    action: receive
    channel: 
      $ref: '#/channels/ping'
    reply:
      channel: 
        $ref: '#/channels/pong'
```

### Multiple messages over the same channel

> When working with protocols like websockets, you can have multiple messages under the same channel. In such scenarios, you can use the `messages` property in the `Operation` object to explicitly define which message among the multiple messages available over the same channel is a request and which is a reply.  

Reviewer 2: let's not mention websocket, as it is not only websocket. It is more about different approach for grouping. In previous example you have 2 channels with 1 message each and the same address, and in this section you say that you can also represent the same info by having 2 channels with 2 messages and the same address. Then just mention that in an Operation you need to specify with `message` which is the requestor message and under Reply you need to also specify with `message` what is the reply message. 

During discussions when we were adding it to the spec, we called it message filtering. So that you can have channel with multiple messages on the same address, and then on operation and reply level you can use `message` to filter out the fluff and just point to specific message

Reviewer 2: I think you missed the comment
